Imagine you’re an uber driver picking clients.

uber driver picking clients.

Imagine you’re an uber driver picking clients.





Motivation: you interview several people for a position, should you stop interviewing and hire someone?



Say you’ll interview only 3 people;



So you should pick the first one, but...



There are 6 possible permutations:

There are 6 possible permutations: Strategy: always reject the first

Strategy: always reject the first candidate and accept the second



Can you think about a strategy? Will the probability of converge to 0?

converge to 0?

Can you think about a strategy? Will the probability of converge to 0?

about a strategy? Will the probability of success

Consider the following strategy: reject first k candidates and then propose to the first candidate better than all previous ones.

Let A i denote the event that the best candidate is the i th candidate. P ( the best is chosen ) = n i = 1 P ( the best is chosen | A i ) P ( A i )

kn , then P ( the best is chosen ) ≈ x ln( x − 1 ) = − x ln( x ) .

Define x = kn , then P ( the best is chosen ) ≈ x ln( x − 1 ) = − x ln( x ) . You can optimize x by taking derivative equal to 0.

Define x = kn , then P ( the best is chosen ) ≈ x ln( x − 1 ) = − x ln( x You can optimize x by taking derivative equal to 0. So the optimal choice is to take k ≈ n / e and this guarantees we choose the best candidate with probability 1 / e .

Our objective function was the probability of choosing the best and we got a probability of 1 e .

we got a probability of 1 e .

Therefore, our online algorithm is 1 e -competitive.

Theorem (Dynkin 1963) In the Hiring Problem, the optimal strategy selects the best candidate with probability 1 e .



If you reject the first 30 % of the candidates (instead of a 1 e fraction), your chances of getting the best would drop to 36 % , the chances of no hiring would drop to 30 % .

Try to always think about the practical and ethical consequences your modeling choices.

Intuitively this is when you know something about the candidates beforehand (you read their CVs).

Intuitively, here we add a cost on each interview.

Objective: maximize expected total gain.

You can also consider richer combinatorial constraints: instead just choosing one candidate you may want to choose k or a set of candidates given some feasibility constraints.